---
layout: post
title: Stacks
date: 2019-08-15
categories: algorithms
tags: [stack]
---

## 394. Decode String

Given an encoded string, return its decoded string.

The encoding rule is: `k[encoded_string]`, where the encoded_string inside the square brackets is being repeated exactly `k` times. Note that `k` is guaranteed to be a positive integer.

You may assume that the input string is always valid; No extra white spaces, square brackets are well-formed, etc.

Furthermore, you may assume that the original data does not contain any digits and that digits are only for those repeat numbers, k. For example, there won't be input like 3a or 2[4].

Examples:

    s = "3[a]2[bc]", return "aaabcbc".
    s = "3[a2[c]]", return "accaccacc".
    s = "2[abc]3[cd]ef", return "abcabccdcdcdef".

*Solution*

As a rule of thumb, I notices that problems with parenthesis are a good candidate for stacks, where the parens are the bounds between entries. So I would go like that:

        s = "3[a2[c]]", return "accaccacc".

For the first level we have `3*`, for the second level we have `a + 2*`, for the third level we have a `c`. 

Reached an `]`, resolve the `a + 2 *` last element which is `c`. Current element is now `acc`, we notice another parens we pop one more and we resolve `3 * acc`.

For this particular problem, it is useful to create a structure for each stack element which contains a prefix `a` and a multiplier `2`. 

One tricky thing is to handle the multiplier because it should always have the default value `1`. So we can't rely on it when doing the usual mathematic trick (which works with `0`). Also we should be careful with the inner loop cause it will affect the outer loop when it has more than `1` digit.
```java


while (i < s.length() && Character.isDigit(s.charAt(i))) {
    element.multiplier = 10 * element.multiplier + Character.getNumericValue(s.charAt(i));
    i++;
}
```
An alternate approach would be to store the multiplier as string also, and we use int getter which will ensure the default of 1.


## 227. Basic Calculator II

Implement a basic calculator to evaluate a simple expression string.

The expression string contains only non-negative integers, +, -, *, / operators and empty spaces . The integer division should truncate toward zero.

Example 1:

    Input: "3+2*2"
    Output: 7

Example 2:

    Input: " 3/2 "
    Output: 1

Example 3:

    Input: " 3+5 / 2 "
    Output: 5

*Solution 1*

Using regex, split first by `+` or `-` and then each one by `*` or `/`. We parse the integers and compute the results. The tricky part is to compute the operator position properly. This is kind of slow cause, first regex is slow and then we traverse the string multiple times.

*Solution 2*

Use a stack holding integers only. Whenever we have a `+` or `-` operation we add to the stack. Whenever we have a `*` or `/` we pop one compute the result and then push back in the stack. 

We need to realize that the time to compute expressions is when we see a sign or when we reach the end of the string BUT the sign we are going to use is not the sign we stopped at but the previous one so we have to keep a reference to it..

Note, I try to use the approach with 2 stacks one for operators and the other one for expressions and then to build from end to start but it didn't work out for the following case:

    100000000/1/2/3/4/5/6/7/8/9/10
    
Division with integers in java is not really associative because if we are starting from the end `9/10 = 0` and then it fucks up the whole equation.

We could try another approach without a stack. There we have to make the same distinction between calculatign totals and addign totals to the result but it is more complicated, maybe in the next step of interview preparations.

































