---
layout: post
title: Greedy
date: 2019-08-18
categories: algorithms
tags: [greedy]
---


### 621 Task Scheduler


Given a char array representing tasks CPU need to do. It contains capital letters A to Z where different letters represent different tasks. Tasks could be done without original order. Each task could be done in one interval. For each interval, CPU could finish one task or just be idle.

However, there is a non-negative cooling interval n that means between two same tasks, there must be at least n intervals that CPU are doing different tasks or just be idle.

You need to return the least number of intervals the CPU will take to finish all the given tasks.


*Solution 1*

Actually my first try was a recursive solution where I tracked both the time and the remaining index. It took to long though. So here is the greedy attempt.

The first observation is that we should always start with the most frequent value because we want to get rid of them as soon as possible. Moreover, tasks with just one frequency can be used as placeholders.

Second, we sometimes need to interweave big tasks. In the following example `AAAABBCDEF` with step=`2` we want to have `ABCABDAEFA` not `ABCDEFAB_A__A`

So we work in cycles. At each cycle we reevaluate the frequencies.

So at the beginning of the cycle we first try to put the highest frequecy char, if we can't do it, we insert a blank. We can't use any other character cause it woudld have already been at a position greater then the most frequent one. 

What if we don't have any characters left and we haven't use all the spots between intervals. We just increment the index.


*Solution 2: Count idle spots.*

If we woudl know the idle spots, we would know the total timer.
How can we compute them ?

    AAAABBCDEF,  step=2. 

IF we would have only `A` the idle spots would be `(A  -1)* 2 = 6`. 
Something like `A__A__A__A`. We can safely use the second group as fillers and so on,

    Case 1: AAAABBCDEF, step 2
    
    A__A__A__A
    AB_AB_A__A
    ABCABDAEFA

    Case 2: AAAABBB, step 2
    A__A__A  - 4 spots
    AB_AB_AB - can fill only 2

So the approach is similar somehow. We count the frequencies, sort them. We take the first one to calculate the spots and then the `Math.min(max-1,freqs[i])` for the next ones.






















