---
layout: post
title: arrays
date: 2019-08-15
categories: algorithms
tags: [arrays]
---

## 152. Maximum Product Subarray

Given an integer array nums, find the contiguous subarray within an array (containing at least one number) which has the largest product.

Example 1:

    Input: [2,3,-2,4]
    Output: 6
    Explanation: [2,3] has the largest product 6.

Example 2:

    Input: [-2,0,-1]
    Output: 0
    Explanation: The result cannot be 2, because [-2,-1] is not a subarray.

*Solution 1*

We use a array to keep a product ending at each index, for each starting index.

Ex. for index 0, the array would look like this `[2, 6, -12, -24]`
for index 1,  it would be `[3, -6, -24]` and so on.

*Solution 2*

If we look at the array ww notice that we can do it in linear time. We need to keep track of three things, the current product, the first negative number and the product since the last negative number. 

The logic is at follows, if the current is positive, it is clearly the maximum product because it all the has numbers seen so far. If it is negative we can turn in into a positive one by taking into consideration only the values since the first negative number.


## 438. Find All Anagrams in a String

Given a string s and a non-empty string p, find all the start indices of p's anagrams in s.

Strings consists of lowercase English letters only and the length of both strings s and p will not be larger than 20,100.

The order of output does not matter.

*Solution o(n)*

The tricky part here is to don't try to use a single frequency vector for both the pattern and the actual string because you will need to manipulate the current string frequency vector when you are computing the sliding window

454. 4Sum II

Given four lists A, B, C, D of integer values, compute how many tuples (i, j, k, l) there are such that A[i] + B[j] + C[k] + D[l] is zero.

To make problem a bit easier, all A, B, C, D have same length of N where 0 ≤ N ≤ 500. All integers are in the range of -228 to 228 - 1 and the result is guaranteed to be at most 231 - 1.


*Solution 1*

I have to admin that first time I tried a catterpillar approach but it doesn't work. I tried to avoid making each combination, thinking that I always increment with the minimum possible and eventually I find all valid combinations but that's not true. It could be one combination takes first from A and last from D, and the second one is the other way around last from A and first from D.

Ok, so we have to try each combination then. Fortunately we don't need to go n^4 and not even n^3 log n. We just group the arrays in two and compute all the possible sums for each group.

 Then we have three options:
 - we keep a frequency  map for each sum in the second half and we just look for it
 - we keep the second half in an array and we do a double binary search on it, once for the left side and the other one for the right side.
 - we keep each of the halfs in an array and then we do a caterpillar search using both arrays multiplying the result (kind of difficult).

``` java
if (sumAB[i] < negSumCD[j]) i++;
else if (sumAB[i] > negSumCD[j]) j++;
else {

    int count1 = 1, count2 = 1;
    while (++i < sumAB.length && sumAB[i] == sumAB[i-1]) {
       count1++;
    }
    while (++j < negSumCD.length && negSumCD[j] == negSumCD[j-1]) {
       count2++;
    }

    res += count1 * count2;
}
}
```

## 162. Find Peak Element

A peak element is an element that is greater than its neighbors.

Given an input array nums, where nums[i] ≠ nums[i+1], find a peak element and return its index.

The array may contain multiple peaks, in that case return the index to any one of the peaks is fine.

You may imagine that nums[-1] = nums[n] = -∞.

Example 1:

    Input: nums = [1,2,3,1]
    Output: 2
    Explanation: 3 is a peak element and your function should return the index number 2.

Example 2:

    Input: nums = [1,2,1,3,5,6,4]
    Output: 1 or 5 
    Explanation: Your function can return either index number 1 where the peak element is 2, or index number 5 where the peak element is 6.


Note:

Your solution should be in logarithmic complexity.


*Solution *
The tricky part here is ofc the logarithmic complexity. That means that we can use binary search.


The logic is as follows, we take the `mid` and we compare it to the next element. Let's say it is smaller than him and so the slope is going up.  There are two situations :
* the slope is going up all the way, but we know the end is -∞ so the last element would be the peak.
* the slope is going up to a point and then going down.

Either way it is safe to go right.

 The same thing holds for when the slope is going down, we just need to go to the left.


 Some points about the implementation : 

Usually in binary search we exclude the current element from the search space. This is not the case here. 


If the slope is going up, we can exclude it, ok, cause the next element is bigger and then the current element could never be the peak.

If the slope is going down, and the current element is bigger than the next one we can not exclude.






## 179. Largest Number


Given a list of non negative integers, arrange them such that they form the largest number.

Example 1:

    Input: [10,2]
    Output: "210"

Example 2:

    Input: [3,30,34,5,9]
    Output: "9534330"

Note: The result may be very large, so you need to return a string instead of an integer.


*Solution 1*
Tried to implement a comparator in which we compare two numbers as string.

Eg. 
* 33 and 3 shoudl return 0
* 34 and 3 should return 34 3
* 31 and 3 should return 3 31
* 128 and 12 shoudl return 128 12
* 121 and 12 shoudl return 12 121

Tried to check if the first digit of the longest string is bigger then first digit of the smallest number we shoudl return the second number else, we should return the first number. 

But it's not that easy, what if we have `1213` and `12`, we need to compare `13` with `12`.

And I am sure that can lead to a lot of corner cases, so the best bet would be to compare `a + b` with `b+a`. 

A tricky thing with connectors is that `-1` means that `o1` will be first, `0` means equal and `1` means that `o1` will be last.


## 315. Count of Smaller Numbers After Self

You are given an integer array nums and you have to return a new counts array. The counts array has the property where counts[i] is the number of smaller elements to the right of nums[i].


Example:

    Input: [5,2,6,1]
    Output: [2,1,1,0]


*Solution * 
This problem looks deceivfully simple, I was used of using a stack and going right to left, keeping in stack all the elements where are less than the current element and computing the stack size - 1

It works for the current data, but for example if the array is [5,2,4,1] it does not longer work.

* index 3, stack is [1]
* index 2, stack is [4,1]
* index 1 stack is [2, 1]
* index 0, stack is [5,2,1] -> result is 2 and it should have been 3. 

The 4 got lost. So I was influenced by a previous problem where we kept the max in a stack when adding elements. But here we don't need to get the maximum, we need to get all the elements. So we need to find a way to 
keep the elements to the right side of the current structure in a data structure that allows us to see how many elements are smaller than the current element. 
A sorted list can work, but when we are inserting the new element we potentially shift all this elemennts. 

A better solution would be our own tree implementation, it looks like there is no build in data structure that performs all the functionality that we need. So we can use a binary tree, which will insert a element and at the same time give us the number of elements smaller than it.

When we are building the binary search tree we need to keep in mind that some elements might be equal. 

Whenver we go right, we add 1 + all the elements to the left.
Whenever we go left, just increase the root node count.



TODO: there is also the option to use a merge sort but this is kind of advanced shit, I will not get there for now.


## 85. Maximal Rectangle

Given a 2D binary matrix filled with 0's and 1's, find the largest rectangle containing only 1's and return its area.

Example:

    ["1","0","1","0","0"],
    ["1","0","1","1","1"],
    ["1","1","1","1","1"],
    ["1","0","0","1","0"]

    Output: 6


* Solution 1*
We just compute the prefix sums for left for each column. At each element with left elements greater than zero we iterate and compute the sum. The complexity is N*N * M . I have used a touple which let me hold the elements on top also so I could do some optimization. 

There is also a stack solution which I will present in rectangular histogram something, to be continued

**Note** A N*M solution does exist involving bounds but it is out of scope.

41. First Missing Positive

Given an unsorted integer array, find the smallest missing positive integer.

*Solution*

The main idea here is to reuse the array as storage. How can we do that ? We can find a way to encode the numbers in a way that we can store information about the missing numbers. For example we could store the index as number and the value could be negative if the value is not present and positive if it's present. 

But way, what if they throw us an `Integer.MAX_VALUE` we can't have an array of that index. That's true, but the trick is that it can never be a solution, neither a number bigger than the array length nor a regative number. For example, [1,2,3,5]. `5` can't be a solution so we can replace or invalide numbers with `1` before doing the encoding.

Btw, don't forget to check for `1` before doing that, cause a missing one should be returned immediately



























