---
layout: post
title: Graphs
date: 2019-08-20
categories: algorithms
tags: [graphs]
---


### 399. Evaluate Division

Equations are given in the format A / B = k, where A and B are variables represented as strings, and k is a real number (floating point number). Given some queries, return the answers. If the answer does not exist, return -1.0.

    Example:
    Given a / b = 2.0, b / c = 3.0.
    queries are: a / c = ?, b / a = ?, a / e = ?, a / a = ?, x / x = ? .
    return [6.0, 0.5, -1.0, 1.0, -1.0 ].

*Solution 1: Graph DFS* 

This is a graph problem and now we will treat is as such.
Every node will have a set of neigbours.


For example `a` will have `b` with value `2.0`.
`b` will have neighbour `c` with value `3.0`. We can navigate through the array and we keep a product of the edges we have seen so far. If we see something visited we back up. If we reach the end we return null.

Words of advice:

 1. There are two ways of calculating the product, one is complicated passing the product parameter further on and then returning it, which is silly, and the other one is to just multiply the result before returning.
 2. Don't try to cache the invalid results, if we didn't reach a node at a point it might be cause we were looking for another path and we already visited some nodes.

*Solution 2: Union-Find* 

The union find logic is as follows, we have to keep the results grouped.

So for the previous example, `a -> b , b -> c`. We can store it as a map, so we know we will always find `c` using `a`.  In the same time we need to keep the correspondence between them, so we will have a parallel map with the distances.

Then we do the union.

    union(b, a) will result is `b = a`
    union(b, c) will result in `c = b`


Since we know the map follows that structure, `a -> b -> c` we could keep the values in the same order `2.0, 3.0, 1.0`. 

The implementation has some tricky points:

1. First we put all the elements in the map and then second we union them. For some reason this has to be separate steps otherwise the elements won't connect. Union means that we find the root of each string and we then point the root of `string1` to the root of `string2`. The reason we do that is cause if 2 elements are connected we want their whole ierarchy connected. This will result in a tree like structure. One important aspect is that when we do the connect, we need to calculate the distance from the root of s1 to the root of s2.  That is `value * v2 / v1` for the reference  (where `v1` is distance from `s1` to the root and `v2` is distance from `s2` to the root) .

2. After we finalize the union stage, we iterate through the queries and for each one of them we check if they are connected or not.

If they are we compute the distance to the root for each one and we divide `v1/v2`.


*Solution 3: BFS*

We go back to the first implementation but we do a BFS instead of DFS.

We keep a queue, we keep the visited node track and we add all the children in the queue. 

There is one tricky part, how do we make sure that we have the correct path cause there might be deviations, for example we go through a path which turned out to be a dead end.

One useful trick is to keep the paths in the queue instead of the nodes. So if we reached that dead end which has no children, the whole path is abandoned.


*Solution 3* BFS with 2 pointers.

We keep two visited maps where we keep each node with the path that leads to it.

For this particular problem we have a issue where the paths from destination is being kept in reverse order so when we merge them we have to take this into consideration


### Dijkstra Algorithm


Warning: I didn't use hashmaps to simulate a graph since there are a lot to take care of. I used a Node with visited and distance defaulted to false and 0.

We need a priority queue where we store the nodes to be processed. We start with the destination. Then we visit each neighbour marking the distance to the source as current node distance (distance to the source) + child distance to this current node. We only do that for unprocessed children, once we processed it it is unmodifiable.

 We put the unprocessed children in the priority queue and we mark the current node as processed. No matter what we can't get a better distance. We stop when we pop the destination from the queue. 


## 207. Course Schedule

There are a total of n courses you have to take, labeled from 0 to n-1.

Some courses may have prerequisites, for example to take course 0 you have to first take course 1, which is expressed as a pair: [0,1]

Given the total number of courses and a list of prerequisite pairs, is it possible for you to finish all courses?

*Solution 1: DFS*

We just use a DFS and two sets for keeping track if the node is visited or visiting. 

If a node has been visited we skip it, if it is currenly visiting (in the call stack) we return false.

After we visit all its children we set the node as visited and not visiting. 

*Solution 2: BFS*

This is more interesting, we keep an array with the incoming vertex count. We add all the nodes with zero incoming vertices to the queue adn then we process them one by one. As we process it we decrease the incoming vertices count of all its children with 1 (since we are done with their parent). We return if the number of processed elements is less than numcourses.


## 277. Find the Celebrity

uppose you are at a party with n people (labeled from 0 to n - 1) and among them, there may exist one celebrity. The definition of a celebrity is that all the other n - 1 people know him/her but he/she does not know any of them.

Now you want to find out who the celebrity is or verify that there is not one. The only thing you are allowed to do is to ask questions like: "Hi, A. Do you know B?" to get information of whether A knows B. You need to find out the celebrity (or verify there is not one) by asking as few questions as possible (in the asymptotic sense).

You are given a helper function bool knows(a, b) which tells you whether A knows B. Implement a function int findCelebrity(n). There will be exactly one celebrity if he/she is in the party. Return the celebrity's label if there is a celebrity in the party. If there is no celebrity, return -1.

*Solution 1* 

we compute two arrays, one with inbounding and the other one with outbounding. For each element we count that we have n-1 in inbounding and zero in outbounding. Complexity is N^2

*Solution 2* 

This is a clever one I found a leet code, at the first pass we find a candidate in O(n). The candidate is not necessarily the one which is know by everybody or doesn't know anybody. 

It is is just the single possible result.

It goes like this, we say that the candidate is 0 and we iterate from 1 to n - 1. If candidate knows i, then i becomes the candidate. 

Let's say that we have 0 to 9 and 0 knows 1 and 1 knows 2. We reached 2, we compare it with the rest and 2 doesn't know anybody. We can't say for sure that 2 doesn't know 1 or 2 doesn't know 0. But we don't want to find out because that means we are getting in O(n^2). We just know that 0 and 1 are not candidates and 3 to 9 aren't candidates either. As far as we know we have a single candidate we can check if 2 is known by everybody and doesn't know anyone in the second pass.





## 127. Word Ladder

Given two words (beginWord and endWord), and a dictionary's word list, find the length of shortest transformation sequence from beginWord to endWord, such that:

*    Only one letter can be changed at a time.
* Each transformed word must exist in the word list. Note that beginWord  is not a transformed word.

Note:

    Return 0 if there is no such transformation sequence.
    All words have the same length.
    All words contain only lowercase alphabetic characters.
    You may assume no duplicates in the word list.
    You may assume beginWord and endWord are non-empty and are not the same.

Example 1:

    Input:
    beginWord = "hit",
    endWord = "cog",
    wordList = ["hot","dot","dog","lot","log","cog"]

    Output: 5

Explanation: As one shortest transformation is "hit" -> "hot" -> "dot" -> "dog" -> "cog",
return its length 5.

*Solution* 

This is a graph problem and we treat it as such, we preprocess the list making a list of wildcards and their mappings.

    {
        d*g=[dog], 
        c*g=[cog], 
        ho*=[hot], 
        *og=[log, cog, dog], 
        h*t=[hot], 
        lo*=[lot, log], 
        l*t=[lot], 
        l*g=[log], 
        do*=[dot, dog], 
        *ot=[lot, dot, hot], 
        d*t=[dot], co*=[cog]
    }


In addition to being a graph this is also a unweighed graph, meaning that it is easy to find a path without  Dijkstra.

I tried to approach it using DFS first, the problem with DFS when you are trying to find the shortest path is that you can't use visited to save some time, but only the visiting map. The problem is that if we go on a path and we we visited a node but a child of it leads on  a path, we might have missed a path which is shorter going through the same node. So we have to unvisit that path which leads to a time limit exceeded.

The other approach would be to go BFS, that has a nice property, if we modify the nodes to store a level, (or store the entire path) we are guaranteed that in an unweighted path, we will find the shortest path because at each iteration we are visiting all the neighbours and set the level accordingly. It is like dijkstra but without weights.



## 130. Surrounded Regions

Given a 2D board containing 'X' and 'O' (the letter O), capture all regions surrounded by 'X'.

A region is captured by flipping all 'O's into 'X's in that surrounded region.

Example:

    X X X X
    X O O X
    X X O X
    X O X X

After running your function, the board should be:

    X X X X
    X X X X
    X X X X
    X O X X

*Solution 1*
I tried a DFS approach where from each zero we go until we find a margin or an enclosed end. Then I backtracked from it and return true at start of the stack. The problem is that I coulnd't find a viable way to both check if it's a region and mark it at the same time.

Eg.

    X X X X X
    X O O O O
    X X O O X
    X O X O X
    X X X X X


We would find a dead edn at `[3,3]` but we can't mark it becuase `[1,4]` will return an invalid result. The only place we will know the result for sure would be at the beginning of the region `[1,1]`

So my approach would be once we know at [1,1] that we have a valid region we will proceed and fill it. 

That means we are making the recursion twice. 

One other approach would be to mark it as visited and valid and on a later pass change all that start at a valid with X. The problem is that we don't know what does it mean when a node is visited. It might mean it is successul or not.

So the alternative approach I found is to go the other way, we mark the cracks first with another letter so that we can differentiate them from the valid regions and then we change the remaining zeros. We mark the cracks back to zero.




















