---
layout: post
title: Trees
date: 2019-08-17
categories: algorithms
tags: [trees]
---


## 337. House Robber III

he thief has found himself a new place for his thievery again. There is only one entrance to this area, called the "root." Besides the root, each house has one and only one parent house. After a tour, the smart thief realized that "all houses in this place forms a binary tree". It will automatically contact the police if two directly-linked houses were broken into on the same night.

Determine the maximum amount of money the thief can rob tonight without alerting the police.

Example 1:

    Input: [3,2,3,null,3,null,1]

        3
       / \
      2   3
       \   \ 
        3   1


*Solution 1* 

This is a little more difficult than it seems.


So at each node we have the option to steal from the node or not to do it it. If we steal from it, we can't steal from any of the children. If we don't steal, then we have the option to do any combination with the children.

Unfortunately I tried it and there were too many combinations, I got a timeout. 

```java

    public int rob(TreeNode root) {
        return Math.max(visit(root, true), visit(root, false));
    }
    
    private int visit(TreeNode root, boolean steal) {

        if (root == null) return 0;

        int leftTrue = visit(root.left, true);
        int leftFalse = visit(root.left, false);
        int rightTrue = visit(root.right, true);
        int rightFalse = visit(root.right, false);


        if (steal) {
            return leftFalse + rightFalse + root.val;
        } else {

            int bothSteal = leftTrue + rightTrue;
            int bothNoSteal = leftFalse + rightFalse;
            int stealLeft = leftTrue + rightFalse;
            int stealRight = leftFalse + rightTrue;

            return Math.max(bothNoSteal, Math.max(bothSteal, Math.max(stealLeft, stealRight)));

        }
    }
    }

```


With this approach I tried to send downstream the command to steal or not. 

*Solution 2*

Other approach would be to send the parent robbed flag. 

```java
    if (root == null) return 0;

    if (parentRobbed) {
        return visit(root.left, false) + visit(root.right, false);
    } else {

        int nodeRobbed = visit(root.left, true) + visit(root.right, true) + root.val;
        int nodeNotRobbed = visit(root.left, false) + visit(root.right, false);

        return Math.max(nodeRobbed, nodeNotRobbed);
    }
```


The tricky thing is to realize that when we start with root we should always use flag false, since the root's parent can't be robbed, as it doesn't exist.

Afterwards, if the parent was robbed, we can't rob any of the children. If it wasn't robbed we can try to rob the current node or to not rob it.


*Solution 3*

Basically there are two approaches here, one with sending parent robbed information and the other one without sending it. 

If we want to make cache somehow the results we are starting from the end,so we can't use the parent information.

We go back to the solution 1, and we realize that instead of visiting the nodes twice, one with steal command and the other one without, we can return 2 results from each call.

```java
    private Result visit(TreeNode root) {

        if (root == null) return new Result();

        Result left = visit(root.left);
        Result right = visit(root.right);
        
        int robbed = left.notRobbed + right.notRobbed + root.val;

        // if we are not stealing from this node
        int bothSteal = left.robbed + right.robbed;
        int bothNoSteal = left.notRobbed + right.notRobbed;
        int stealLeft = left.robbed + right.notRobbed;
        int stealRight = left.notRobbed + right.robbed;

        int notRobbed = Math.max(bothNoSteal, Math.max(bothSteal, Math.max(stealLeft, stealRight)));


        return new Result(robbed, notRobbed);
    }
```
### 114. Flatten Binary Tree to Linked List

Given a binary tree, flatten it to a linked list in-place.


*Solution 1*

I went left and I arranged all the nodes so the left are shifted to the right. I made sure that I reach the bottom of the left subtree and I added the right item at the end.

*Solution 2*


An alternative is to instead of returning the head of the left tree, navigate to its end and the add the right tree, to pass in the head of the right subtree to the left node which will put it to it's right.


         1
        / \
       2   5
      / \   \
     3   4   6

So for the last subtree (2,3,4) we return 4 from the right subtree. Then we pass 4 to 3, and we put it to the right of 3. Then we return 3.

```java
    private TreeNode flatten(TreeNode node, TreeNode prev) {

        if (node == null) return prev;
        prev = flatten(node.right, prev);
        prev = flatten(node.left, prev);
        node.right = prev;
        node.left = null;
        prev = node;
        return prev;
    }
```

## 236. Lowest Common Ancestor of a Binary Tree


Given a binary tree, find the lowest common ancestor (LCA) of two given nodes in the tree.

According to the definition of LCA on Wikipedia: “The lowest common ancestor is defined between two nodes p and q as the lowest node in T that has both p and q as descendants (where we allow a node to be a descendant of itself).”

*Solution 1*

We look for p and q in both left and right. Then we do some calculus.
If left contains p and right contains q or vice-versa we return the root.

If both are in left side or both are in the right side, we go to that side.

If root is p or root is q we return root. This is a little tricky. There are different cases, if we are guaranteed that p and q are in the tree or not. If it is guaranteed they are in the tree, we can return root because there are 2 cases. Let's say p is root.

* if `q` is on the other branch we can return `p` cause from the other branch we would return `q` at some point and the result is valid
* if `q` is on the same branch we can return `p` since it is the lowest common ancestor.

On the other hand, if we are not guaranteed that both `p` and `q` in the tree and we see `p` can't return it. Because if q is not existent, it would look like `p` is the lowest commonc acestor although it is not.



## 230. Kth Smallest Element in a BST

Given a binary search tree, write a function kthSmallest to find the kth smallest element in it.

Note:
You may assume k is always valid, 1 ≤ k ≤ BST's total elements.

Example 1:

    Input: root = [3,1,4,null,2], k = 1
      3
     / \
    1   4
     \
      2
    Output: 1

Example 2:

    Input: root = [5,3,6,2,4,null,null,1], k = 3
           5
          / \
         3   6
        / \
       2   4
      /
     1
Output: 3


*Solution 1: recursive*

Most intuitive solution is to navigate to outermost left leaf of the tree returning from there both the current count and the result if any.

*Solution 2: iterative*

I found a very elegant solution on leetcode. When going iterative, there is a workaround for avoiding removing the node child in order to not get into an infinite loot, processing the same node over and over again. The trick is to go left first, adding all the nodes which have a left, then popping one at a time, taking the right node and going full left again. We keep a track of the visited nodes count to compute the rank.


```java

    Stack<TreeNode> stack = new Stack<>();

    while (true) {

        while (root != null) {
            stack.push(root);
            root = root.left;
        }

        root = stack.pop();
        if (--k == 0) {
            return root.val;
        }

        root = root.right;

    }

```


## 103. Binary Tree Zigzag Level Order Traversal

Given a binary tree, return the zigzag level order traversal of its nodes' values. (ie, from left to right, then right to left for the next level and alternate between).

For example:
Given binary tree [3,9,20,null,null,15,7],

        3
       / \
      9  20
        /  \
       15   7

return its zigzag level order traversal as:

    [
    [3],
    [20,9],
    [15,7]
    ]

*Solution*

The solution is not extremly difficult but there are some easy ways to mess it up. 

We will use a list for the previous row, and a list for the current row.

First of all, we shouldn't display nulls in the result. That can be done two different ways: we either don't put it in the list or we don't process it. If we don't put it in the queue, it is easier to detect when the queue is empty.

Second thing, the list has to always be processed from end to start, doesn't matter if it is left to right or right to left. The reason for it that the previous list will be always sorted in a reverse way from what we expect/

so if right to left it's `[20, 9]`. to go right to left means that we process the `9` first and then the `20`. 

On the other hand, if the left to right is `[9,20]` when we are going right to left we have to start with `20` and then `9`.


## 285. Inorder Successor in BST
Medium

Given a binary search tree and a node in it, find the in-order successor of that node in the BST.

The successor of a node p is the node with the smallest key greater than p.val.

 Example 1:

    Input: root = [2,1,3], p = 1
    Output: 2
Explanation: 1's in-order successor node is 2. Note that both p and the return value is of TreeNode type.

*Solution *

There are two scenarios here. 

Usually the next element is found by looking to the left most child of the right node (not the right node itself, unless it is empty). What if the element doesn't have a right node. that means that the element should be something from above. 

So in order to complete that we can pass in the next element to the child, only to be returned if the right node is null.


```java

    public TreeNode visit(TreeNode node, TreeNode p, TreeNode next) {
        
        if (node == null) return null;

        if (node == p) {
            if (node.right == null) {
                return next;
            } else {
                while (node.left != null) {
                    node = node.left;
                }
                return node;  
            }
        }
        
        if (p.val < node.val) {            
                return visit(node.left, p, node);            
        } else {
            
                return visit(node.right, p, next);
            
        }
    }

```



*Solution 2 Iterative*

First of all we observe that from p, we can see that if it has a right child, we can go all the way to the minimum left to retrieve it.

Second, we can use the stack to mimic the recursive call, remember all the way left and then we go right.

We start with an empty stack and the condition is stack is not empty or root is not null. So we actually could have the stack empty cause we popped the last node, but that node will have a lot of nodes to its left.

        1
          \
            2
          /
         3    
       /
      4    

A little different from what we had before and a little tricky.

 Then we add root and go root = root.left until root is null.

 Then we pop one and to the calculations that we  need. Finaly we do root = root.right. So that mimicks an inorder traversal, left then current then right. The actual calculcations happend after root.pop(). 
 
 The other tricky stuff is that we have to find the previous element. In a traversal like this we can't know the previous in an instant because it might come from the stack or not. So our best solution is to compute it at the previous iteration if root == p and then we go as usual one more round and return previous it was set to p. Phew









